
DOUBLETALK PC/LT USER'S MANUAL

Copyright (C) 1991, 1992 RC Systems, Inc.
                              All rights reserved.

LIMITED WARRANTY


     RC SYSTEMS, INC. ("RC Systems") warrants this product against defects
     in material and workmanship for a period of TWO (2) YEARS from the
     date of original retail purchase by the original consumer purchaser.

     If you discover a defect in this product, RC Systems will, at its
     option, repair, replace or refund the purchase price of this product
     at no charge to you, provided you return it during the warranty
     period, transportation charges prepaid, to the dealer from whom you
     purchased it or to RC Systems. A copy of your purchase receipt or
     other proof of date of original consumer purchase must be provided
     with each product returned for warranty service. Please also attach
     your name, address, telephone number, and a complete description of
     the problem when returning any RC Systems product for warranty
     service.

     You may request additional information about this warranty by
     contacting the RC Systems dealer from whom the product was purchased,
     or by contacting RC Systems directly at the address printed on this
     certificate. This warranty applies only to products manufactured by RC
     Systems; RC Systems does not warrant any products that are not RC
     Systems products. This warranty does not apply if the product has been
     damaged by accident, abuse, misuse or misapplication, has been
     modified without the written permission of RC Systems, or if any RC
     Systems serial number has been removed or defaced.

     ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
     MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, ARE LIMITED IN
     DURATION TO TWO YEARS FROM THE DATE OF ORIGINAL RETAIL PURCHASE OF
     THIS PRODUCT.

     THE WARRANTY AND REMEDIES SET FORTH ABOVE ARE EXCLUSIVE AND IN LIEU OF
     ALL OTHERS, ORAL OR WRITTEN, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. No RC Systems dealer,
     agent or employee is authorized to make any modification, extension or
     addition to this warranty.

     RC SYSTEMS IS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL
     DAMAGES RESULTING FROM ANY BREACH OF WARRANTY, OR UNDER ANY OTHER
     LEGAL THEORY, INCLUDING LOST PROFITS, GOODWILL, DOWNTIME, DAMAGE TO OR
     REPLACEMENT OF EQUIPMENT AND PROPERTY, AND ANY COSTS OF RECOVERING,
     REPROGRAMMING OR REPRODUCING ANY PROGRAM OR DATA STORED IN OR USED
     WITH RC SYSTEMS PRODUCTS.

i

Some states do not allow the exclusion or limitation of incidental or
     consequential damages or limitations on how long an implied warranty
     lasts, so the above limitation or exclusion may not apply to you. This
     warranty gives you specific legal rights, and you may also have other
     rights which vary from state to state.

RC Systems, Inc.
                               121 W. Winesap Rd.
                               Bothell, WA 98012
                                 (206) 672-6909

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

     INTRODUCTION ....................................................... 1
     ABOUT THIS MANUAL .................................................. 1
     SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS ................................................ 2
         DoubleTalk PC .................................................. 2
         DoubleTalk LT .................................................. 2

     INSTALLATION ....................................................... 2
         DoubleTalk PC .................................................. 2
         DoubleTalk LT .................................................. 4

     UTILITIES DISK ..................................................... 5
         Disk Contents .................................................. 5
         Program Descriptions ........................................... 5
             SMARTALK ................................................... 5
                 TTS .................................................... 6
                 LPC .................................................... 6
                 PCM .................................................... 6
                 TGN .................................................... 7
             DTPRN ...................................................... 7
                 Installing DTPRN ....................................... 7
                 Disabling DoubleTalk's buffer .......................... 8
                 Removing DTPRN from memory ............................. 8
                 Sending text and commands .............................. 8
                 Stopping speech production ............................. 8
             IBMDRV ..................................................... 8
             SPEECH.PRD ................................................. 9
             \SRD ...................................................... 10

     OPERATIONAL DESCRIPTION ........................................... 11
         TTS Operating Modes ........................................... 11
             Text mode ................................................. 12
             Character mode ............................................ 12
             Phoneme mode .............................................. 12
         Translation Accuracy .......................................... 12
         Commands ...................................................... 13
             Command formats ........................................... 13
             The command character ..................................... 13
                 Changing the command character ........................ 14
             Command parameters ........................................ 14
         Command Descriptions .......................................... 14
             E (Enable Intonation) ..................................... 14
             M (Disable Intonation) .................................... 15
             nF (Formant Frequency) .................................... 15
             nS (Speed) ................................................ 15
             nP (Pitch) ................................................ 15
             nV (Volume) ............................................... 15
             nX (Tone) ................................................. 16
             nB (Punctuation Level) .................................... 16
             nY (Timeout Delay) ........................................ 16

iii

L (Load Exceptions) ....................................... 17
             U (Enable Exceptions) ..................................... 17
             R (Clear) ................................................. 18
             @ (Reinitialize) .......................................... 18
             Z (Zap Commands) .......................................... 18
             J (Tone Generators) ....................................... 18
             nT (Text Mode/Delay) ...................................... 18
             nC (Character Mode/Delay) ................................. 18
             D (Phoneme Mode) .......................................... 19
                 Phoneme attribute tokens .............................. 19
                 Applications of Phoneme mode .......................... 20
             n# (PCM Mode) ............................................. 20
             nG (Protocol Options) ..................................... 21
             nI (Index Marker) ......................................... 21
         Command Summary ............................................... 21

     APPENDIX A ........................................................ 22
         LPC Word Lists ................................................ 22

     APPENDIX B ........................................................ 25
         Specifications ................................................ 25

iv

INTRODUCTION

     DoubleTalk is a speech synthesis system which supports virtually all
     of the speech technologies in use today, including text-to-speech
     (TTS), LPC, PCM, ADPCM and CVSD. With it, your IBM-compatible computer
     will be able to speak to you from your own programs, as well as many
     programs specifically written for speech output.

     There are many ways you can use your DoubleTalk synthesizer. If you
     write your own programs, you can easily add speech output to them.
     Commercial programs specifically written to work with DoubleTalk, as
     well as many that work with IBM's Speech Adapter, can be used with
     DoubleTalk. There's even a program on the included Utilities disk that
     allows you to install DoubleTalk as a "talking" printer or
     communications device, enabling you to read files from many text-based
     programs with speech output!

     DoubleTalk is also supported by virtually all of the major "screen
     reader" programs that give blind users access to commercial programs.

ABOUT THIS MANUAL

     This manual covers both the DoubleTalk PC and DoubleTalk LT
     synthesizers. DoubleTalk PC is an internal card that plugs into a
     standard slot in the computer. DoubleTalk LT is an external, stand-
     alone version of DoubleTalk PC that plugs into a serial port of the
     computer, instead of an internal slot. This can be of benefit when you
     need to share DoubleTalk with more than one computer, or where an
     internal slot is not available (such in many laptops and notebooks).
     DoubleTalk LT can also be used with non DOS-based computers, such as
     the Apple II family and Macintosh LC.

     We have attempted to write this manual as concisely and clearly as
     possible. The subjects of interest to everyone, such as installing
     DoubleTalk, is contained in the first part of the manual. The more
     complex (and usually boring to non-programmer types) subjects are left
     to the latter parts of the manual, which you may skip entirely if you
     wish. In particular, the manual enters the Twilight Zone in the
     section entitled "Operational Description," and it never really does
     return to reality after that.

     For the serious user, software developer, or otherwise deranged
     person, a DoubleTalk Developer's Tools disk is available from RC
     Systems. It is not a product for the novice user or faint-hearted, as
     it is quite technical in nature. Topics covered include:

          Using the exception dictionary & compiler

          Driver source code

          Using DoubleTalk's PCM mode

          Programming DoubleTalk's tone generators



     RC SYSTEMS                      - 1 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT

DoubleTalk hardware interface

          QuickBASIC support library

          Programming with the DTPRN and IBMDRV drivers

          Programming tips



     SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS


     DoubleTalk PC

     The only hardware DoubleTalk PC requires is an IBM PC, XT, AT, 386,
     486, PS2-25, PS2-30 or any of the many "compatibles" on the market.
     Virtually any Tandy computer except the 1000EX and 1000HX, will also
     work with DoubleTalk. DoubleTalk PC will not work in computers
     equipped with "Microchannel" style slots, such as the PS2-80. In other
     words, virtually any computer with a standard 8 or 16 bit slot (also
     known as an "ISA slot") will work with DoubleTalk PC.


     DoubleTalk LT

     DoubleTalk LT requires only a serial port operating at 9600 baud, 8
     data bits, 1 stop bit, and no parity (9600, N, 8, 1). Because
     DoubleTalk LT was originally designed for another computer family
     (specifically, the Macintosh LC), you will need a small adapter cable
     to convert the 8-pin circular plug on DoubleTalk to the standard 9-pin
     serial plug found on most PCs. If this cable is not available from
     your dealer, you can obtain one from RC Systems.



     INSTALLATION


     DoubleTalk PC

     Installing DoubleTalk PC in your computer is easy. Before you begin,
     be sure you have the following:

          An open 8-bit or 16-bit system expansion slot on your
           computer's motherboard

          MS-DOS or PC-DOS Version 2.0 (or later) present in
           your computer

          A medium screwdriver or 3/16" nut driver or wrench

     Then follow these steps:

     1. Turn off the power to the computer and unplug the power cord.
        Attempting to install a board in the computer while the computer's




     RC SYSTEMS                      - 2 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT





        power is on can cause permanent damage to both the board and the
        computer.

     2. Remove the cover from your computer. Refer to your computer's
        owner's guide if you are not sure how to remove its cover.

     3. Choose any empty expansion slot and remove the small metal cover by
        removing the retaining screw with a screwdriver or nut driver. Be
        sure to keep the screw; you'll use it in a later step to secure the
        DoubleTalk board in place.

     4. Hold the DoubleTalk board firmly at the top edges, and firmly press
        the gold connector into the expansion slot. Make sure the board is
        firmly seated in the slot with the gold connector fully inserted.
        The board will fit only one way in the slot.

     5. Using the screw removed in step 3, secure DoubleTalk in the
        computer by reinstalling the screw in the retaining bracket.

     6. Replace the computer's cover and plug in the power cord.

     7. Plug the supplied speaker into the jack on DoubleTalk's rear
        bracket. Locate the plastic volume control shaft and adjust it to
        about the mid point of its movement. Later, you may want to further
        fine tune the volume, but setting it at the midpoint now insures
        you don't accidentally attempt to use DoubleTalk with the volume
        turned all the way off.

     8. Turn on the computer and run the test program supplied on the
        DoubleTalk Utilities disk. Do this by inserting the disk in drive
        A: and typing the following DOS commands:

          A: <Enter>
          TEST <Enter>

     If all is well you should hear two test messages, one in a male voice
     and one female, come from DoubleTalk's speaker.

     In the rare event that your DoubleTalk board does not pass the above
     test, re-check your work, making sure DoubleTalk is installed per the
     above instructions. Usually a mute DoubleTalk can be pinpointed to a
     silly mistake, such as the speaker not being plugged in, or the volume
     control being turned all the way down (if you purchased DoubleTalk PC
     Pro, remember that the speaker that came with it also has a volume
     control).

     If you still cannot get any sound out of DoubleTalk after trying the
     above suggestions, try changing its port address by moving the small
     black plastic connector, located at the lower left edge of the
     DoubleTalk board, to a different pair of pins on the jumper block.
     When moving the connector, make sure it remains oriented from left to
     right, not up and down. DoubleTalk requires two adjacent I/O addresses
     in your computer; the hexadecimal numbers printed on the left side of
     the jumper block indicate the first ("base") address used when the
     black connector is placed in that position. (The I/O address is the
     only configurable aspect of DoubleTalk, since it doesn't use DMA or




     RC SYSTEMS                      - 3 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT





     generate IRQ's. The factory-set address is 29Eh, causing DoubleTalk to
     use addresses 29Eh and 29Fh.)

     As a last resort, try using another speaker, if one is available.


     DoubleTalk LT

     In order to use DoubleTalk LT with your PC, you will need an adapter
     to convert DoubleTalk's small 8-pin circular plug to your PC's 9-pin
     serial port plug. This serial port adapter comes standard with the "PC
     version" of DoubleTalk LT. The adapter is a short (about 6 inches)
     cable, with a circular "mini-DIN" female connector on one end and a
     DB9 female on the other.

     To set up DoubleTalk LT, follow these steps:

     1. Look at the end of the cord that is attached to the back of
        DoubleTalk, noting the eight tiny pins in the plug. Align these
        pins with the eight holes in the serial port adapter, and press
        them firmly together.

     2. Plug the other end of the serial port adapter into a serial (COM)
        port in your computer.

     3. Plug the AC adapter that came with DoubleTalk into any convenient
        wall outlet. Plug the cord from the AC adapter into the power jack
        at the back of DoubleTalk. (Note: DoubleTalk LT can also run from a
        9 volt alkaline battery for periods of up to 10 hours or more,
        depending on how heavily it is used.)

     4. If you will be using headphones, plug them into the headphone jack
        in the front of DoubleTalk. (Note: The headphone jack is of the
        stereo type. Monaural headphones will not work without an adapter.)

     5. Turn the small black wheel on the front of DoubleTalk until you
        hear a small click. This is DoubleTalk's power switch and volume
        control. Shortly after turning the unit on, you should hear the
        words "DoubleTalk ready" come from the internal speaker or
        headphones. If you do not, check to make sure that the AC adapter
        is properly connected. If you are using headphones, try unplugging
        them and turn DoubleTalk's power off and back on. If you hear the
        power-on message now from DoubleTalk's speaker, you probably have
        the wrong type (mono) plug on your headphones (plugging headphones
        into the headphone jack mutes the internal speaker, to allow
        private listening).

     6. Turn on the computer and run the test program supplied on the
        DoubleTalk Utilities disk. Do this by inserting the disk in drive
        A: and typing the following DOS commands:

          A: <Enter>
          TEST <Enter>

     If all is well you should hear two test messages, one in a male voice
     and one female, come from DoubleTalk.




     RC SYSTEMS                      - 4 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT





     UTILITIES DISK

     The Utilities disk that came with your DoubleTalk board contains a
     number of useful and fun programs.


     Disk Contents

     The Utilities disk contains the following programs and files:

     MANUAL.TXT     - This file
     TEST.COM       - DoubleTalk test program
     DTPRN.COM      - Text-to-speech printer driver
     IBMDRV.COM     - IBM Speech Adapter BIOS emulator
     SPEECH.PRD     - Talking printer definition file for MS-Word
     SMARTALK.EXE   - DoubleTalk demo program
     SMARTALK.HLP   - Help system file for SMARTALK.EXE
     WORDS1.LPC     - LPC data file for SmartTalk (male)
     WORDS2.LPC     - LPC data file for SmartTalk (female)
     *.PCM          - PCM/ADPCM data files for SmartTalk
     SPANISH.EXA    - TTS Spanish dictionary for DTPRN.COM
     SPANISH.EXS    - TTS Spanish dictionary for SmartTalk
     *.TGN          - Tone generator data files for SmartTalk
     \SRD           - Support files for IBM Screen Reader


     Program Descriptions


     SMARTALK

     This program enables you to try out DoubleTalk easily and exercise its
     various functions and features. To run SmartTalk, type

          SMARTALK <Enter>

     at the DOS prompt.

     You should be able to navigate around SmartTalk by following the help
     line at the bottom of the screen, and using the context-sensitive help
     available with the F1 key. SmartTalk works with a mouse or keyboard.

     The SmartTalk screen is made up of four distinct areas, or windows,
     which control the four major functions of DoubleTalk. Any one of these
     windows can be activated at a given time; the remaining three inactive
     windows are dimmed. A different window can be activated by clicking on
     it with the mouse, or using the PgUp and PgDn keys.

     The LPC window controls the LPC synthesizer, the PCM window controls
     the PCM synthesizer, and so on. Inside each of these windows are
     various parameter fields, or "hotspots," so named because they are
     activated whenever they are clicked on with the mouse. Each of these
     fields performs a specific function, such as setting the
     text-to-speech synthesizer's speed or pitch, or loading a data file.
     If you don't have a mouse, you can select each field in turn by
     repeatedly pressing the Tab key. The Shift-Tab key combination works




     RC SYSTEMS                      - 5 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT





     similarly, except it moves through the fields in the opposite
     direction.

     Each field also has a corresponding "hotkey," designated by the
     highlighted letter in the field's name. To select a field in this
     manner, press and hold the Alt key and the corresponding letter key;
     e.g., Alt+S selects the text-to-speech synthesizer's Speed field;
     Alt+L loads a data file, and so on.

     After a field has been selected, you can change its value in any of
     several different ways. If you have a mouse, pressing the right button
     will decrease the field's value; pressing the right button while
     holding down the left button will increase the field's value (as will
     the center button on three-button mice). If you prefer to use the
     keyboard, the right and left arrow keys can be used to increase and
     decrease the field's value in one-step increments; the up and down
     arrow keys do so in larger steps. To return to the text-entry box,
     press Enter or click inside the box.

     Pressing the F9 key will display an Info box, indicating how many LPC
     and PCM words and sounds are currently loaded in memory, as well as
     PCM encoding type, etc. The F7 key temporarily suspends SmartTalk and
     returns you to DOS, without quitting SmartTalk. You may use any DOS
     commands while in this mode. The F10 (or Esc) key exits SmartTalk.

     The four SmartTalk function windows, TTS, LPC, PCM and TGN, are
     described next.

     TTS
     This window gives you access to DoubleTalk's text-to-speech
     synthesizer. You can enter any word or phrase you wish and change any
     of the speech parameters by modifying the corresponding parameter
     field directly, or typing the equivalent commands in the text-entry
     box. A special "View" mode can be activated with the Mode field,
     enabling you to view the phonemes DoubleTalk uses to speak the text in
     the text-entry box. This can prove to be a valuable tool for choosing
     the correct phonemes during the creation of an exception dictionary
     (described in a later section).

     LPC
     The LPC window activates DoubleTalk's LPC synthesizer. Two LPC data
     files, WORDS1 and WORDS2, are supplied (see Appendix A for a list of
     these words). DoubleTalk supports standard LPC-10 data and two speeds
     of playback.

     PCM
     This window allows you to play back digitized sounds which have either
     PCM or ADPCM encoding. A number of data files are included on the
     disk, including DTMF, which generates the 16 touch-tone sounds of a
     touch-tone phone. You can manipulate the playback sampling rate with
     the Rate field (note that the sampling rate is automatically set to
     the same rate as the data file). The volume is controlled by the TTS
     synthesizer's volume parameter (in the TTS window).

RC SYSTEMS                      - 6 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT





     TGN
     This window activates DoubleTalk's tone generators. Simply load one of
     the sample tone generator data files from the disk and press the Play
     button. Press the Cancel button to cancel the playback at any time.


     DTPRN

     DTPRN is a small resident (TSR) program which enables your programs to
     access DoubleTalk's text-to-speech synthesizer as a printer (LPT1 -
     LPT3) or communications port (COM1 - COM4). This enables most programs
     (such as word processors) and programming languages to communicate
     with DoubleTalk by simply "printing" the text to be spoken to the
     port. DTPRN requires only 1K of memory, and can be loaded into upper
     memory on machines supporting this feature using the DOS LOADHIGH
     command.

     Installing DTPRN

     The printer driver is invoked from the DOS command line by typing the
     command

          DTPRN <port> [/N]

     where <port> is one of the seven system ports LPT1 - LPT3 or COM1 -
     COM4. For example, the driver can be installed as LPT2 by typing

          DTPRN LPT2 (or LPT2:)

     If no port specification is given, the driver will install itself as
     LPT3. During installation, the driver will initialize DoubleTalk; if
     DoubleTalk cannot be located in the computer, the driver will abort
     the installation procedure and notify you.

     If an error occurs during the installation of DTPRN, such as the use
     of an invalid port name, DoubleTalk wasn't found, or DTPRN is already
     resident, an error code is returned to your program. This code can be
     processed in a batch program using the IF ERRORLEVEL command, so
     appropriate action can be taken. The following is a summary of the
     return codes returned by DTPRN:

          0    DTPRN was successfully installed (no errors).
          1    DTPRN is already resident.
          2    An invalid port name was specified.
          3    Invalid parameter on command line (DTPRN still loads).
          4    Too many parameters on command line (DTPRN still loads).
          5    Incompatible version of DOS (must be 2.0 or later).
          6    DoubleTalk couldn't be located in the computer.

     During operation, DTPRN intercepts the appropriate BIOS software
     interrupt vector (14h for COM ports and 17h for LPT ports). Therefore,
     programs that bypass the BIOS interrupts by accessing the port's
     hardware directly (as some terminal programs do) will not speak, since
     DoubleTalk will never receive the output characters.






     RC SYSTEMS                      - 7 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT





     Disabling DoubleTalk's buffer

     The optional command line switch /N is used to disable DoubleTalk's
     text buffer. This can be beneficial in applications where it is
     important that the speech stay synchronized with the text being read
     from the screen.

     Removing DTPRN from memory

     DTPRN can be removed from memory by typing

          DTPRN /R

     Removing DTPRN from memory frees the 1000 or so bytes of RAM that it
     uses, as well as allow the printer or communications port assigned to
     DTPRN to function normally again.

     Sending text and commands

     Any combination of text and commands can be sent to DoubleTalk via
     DTPRN. Note, however, that DoubleTalk will not begin speaking until it
     receives at least one carriage return (0dh) or null (00h), except when
     in Character mode. Only the text up to that point will be spoken. Note
     that additional text can be sent while DoubleTalk is speaking.

     A special feature of DTPRN is the way in which it handles DoubleTalk
     commands. DoubleTalk itself accepts only a control character for its
     command character (^A by default - see Commands section, below), which
     can be somewhat difficult, if not impossible, to enter in some
     printing applications, such as a word processor. For this reason, the
     driver has been written to also accept an asterisk (*) as the command
     character, besides the standard ^A character. A so-called "asterisk
     command" must be followed by an alphanumeric character, '+', '-', or
     '@' to be considered a valid command by the driver. Examples of valid
     asterisk commands are:

          *8s   *3F   *+10P

     Stopping speech production

     You can momentarily silence the speech by pressing the left and right
     Shift keys simultaneously. Keep in mind, however, that this action
     will not terminate the file being printed to DoubleTalk - you must
     stop the "printing" of the file from the application program (usually
     by pressing the Escape key or Control-C). Pressing the Shift keys only
     erases the text currently in DoubleTalk's input buffer.


     IBMDRV

     This is another small TSR program which enables you to use DoubleTalk
     with a number of talking educational software packages. To install it,
     simply type IBMDRV at the DOS prompt. Note that IBMDRV must be
     installed prior to running the talking software.

     IBMDRV can be removed from memory by typing




     RC SYSTEMS                      - 8 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT





          IBMDRV /R

     Software that has been tested and known to work with IBMDRV is IBM's
     Bouncy Bee Learns Letters, Bouncy Bee Learns Words, Writing to Read,
     and Hartley Courseware's Project Star and Brick by Brick series. Not
     tested, but "probables," are IBM's Measurement, Time & Money and
     Hartley's Money Series.


     SPEECH.PRD

     This is a printer definition file for turning DoubleTalk into a
     versatile "talking printer" with Microsoft Word 5.0. Simply copy the
     SPEECH.PRD file to your Word disk or directory, and a new printer
     named "SPEECH" will appear in your Print Options printer list.


         NOTE  The printer driver DTPRN (described in an earlier
               section) must be installed in order for Word (or
               any other word processor, for that matter) to read
               its files through DoubleTalk. We recommend that
               you install DTPRN as port LPT3, so as not to
               interfere with your "real" printer.


     When selecting the SPEECH printer in Word, make sure you choose the
     same port that DTPRN is using (LPT3, if you followed the suggestion
     given above) in Word's Printer Options setup.

     When you print a document to the SPEECH printer, DoubleTalk always
     begins speaking with the speech parameters set to the following
     values:

                 Fmt Freq =  5
                    Pitch =  50
                    Speed =  5
               Dictionary =  Disabled

     The SPEECH printer also recognizes seven font attributes and acts upon
     them as shown in the following table:


               Attribute                Voice Change

               Underline                Low volume
               Dbl underline            High volume
               Strike thru              Low pitch
               Italics                  High pitch
               Subscript                Slow speed
               Superscript              Fast speed
               Bold                     Use dictionary

     The reason we included a command to turn DoubleTalk's exception
     dictionary on and off ("Bold" attribute) is to enable you to use
     foreign languages, as well as English, in your documents. This has
     proven to be of great potential in classroom environments, where the
     teacher is able to set up talking foreign language lessons containing



     RC SYSTEMS                      - 9 -                 DOUBLETALK PC/LT





     both English and foreign words and phrases. To set up such a system
     for Spanish and English, for example, follow these steps:

     1. Run DTPRN.COM.
     2. Load the Spanish dictionary SPANISH.EXA into DoubleTalk.
     3. Run Word.

     This procedure can be automated by creating a batch file similar to
     the following:

          @echo off
          dtprn
          if errorlevel 2 goto Exit
          type spanish.exa > lpt3
          word
          :Exit

     The "asterisk" commands offered by DTPRN, described in the DTPRN
     section above, can also be used with the SPEECH printer.


     \SRD (directory)

     The purpose of the files in the SRD directory is to enable DoubleTalk
     to work with the IBM Screen Reader. Simply copy the appropriate files
     to the directory or disk that contains your Screen Reader program, as
     follows:

     DoubleTalk PC:
          SRDPROG.EXE (Screen Reader version 1.1 ONLY!!)
          DTPCASYN.EXE (rename as SRDASYNC.EXE after copying)
          DTPC.TTS (rename as SRD.TTS after copying)
          DT.MSG (rename as SRD.MSG after copying)

     DoubleTalk LT:
          SRDPROG.EXE (Screen Reader version 1.1 ONLY!!)
          DTLTASYN.EXE (rename as SRDASYNC.EXE after copying)
          DTLT.TTS (rename as SRD.TTS after copying)
          DT.MSG (rename as SRD.MSG after copying)

     Screen Reader version 1.1 has a bug in the program file SRDPROG.EXE,
     which degrades Screen Reader's performance with DoubleTalk. This file
     should be replaced with the SRDPROG.EXE file, included on this disk,
     but ONLY if you have Screen Reader version 1.1. The bug was fixed in
     Screen Reader version 1.2. Do NOT replace the SRDPROG.EXE file shipped
     with version 1.2, or the program may hang!

     If you are setting up Screen Reader for use with the DoubleTalk LT,
     note that it will initially be set up for port COM1. If your
     DoubleTalk LT is connected to a port other than COM1, you must change
     Screen Reader's port setting with the SRDUTIL program.

     The following Special codes have been included in the DTPC.TTS and
     DTLT.TTS files:






     RC SYSTEMS                      - 10 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT





           AA1 - Disable exception dictionary
           AA2 - Enable exception dictionary
           AA3 - Bass
           AA4 - Treble
           AA5 - Formant frequency "3" (DTPC.TTS only)
           AA6 - Formant frequency "5" (normal)
           AA7 - Formant frequency "7" (DTPC.TTS only)
           AA8 - Monotone (no intonation)
           AA9 - Inflected (automatic intonation)

     Note that Special codes 1 and 2 may be used to switch between English
     (code 1) and a foreign language (code 2), such as Spanish. Of course,
     you may re-assign any DoubleTalk commands you wish to the Special
     codes using the SRDUTIL program that came with your Screen Reader.

     When Screen Reader initially loads, it looks in the current directory
     for a user exception dictionary named SRD.EXA. If the file exists, it
     is automatically loaded into DoubleTalk. (This is the easiest way to
     make Screen Reader speak in a foreign language; to speak in Spanish,
     for example, simply copy the SPANISH.EXA file to your Screen Reader
     directory, and rename it SRD.EXA.) It is not necessary that the
     dictionary be present for Screen Reader to function.



     OPERATIONAL DESCRIPTION

     This section describes the operational characteristics of DoubleTalk.
     Since this is somewhat technical in nature and is not necessary to
     successfully use DoubleTalk, you may wish to stop here.


     TTS Operating Modes

     DoubleTalk's text-to-speech synthesizer has three operating modes
     which determine how incoming text is processed by the internal speech
     algorithms. These modes are the Text, Character and Phoneme modes,
     treated separately in the following paragraphs. The operating mode can
     be changed at any time, even within the same string of text.


         NOTE  The operation of DoubleTalk's LPC, PCM and CVSD
               synthesizers are not discussed here, as they are
               technical in nature and require some programming
               skills to be used effectively. Obtain the
               Developer's Tools disk if you are interested in
               receiving more information about these DoubleTalk
               functions.


     Regardless of the operating mode, DoubleTalk does not make any
     distinction between uppercase and lowercase characters. Text and
     commands may be sent as all uppercase, all lowercase, or any
     combination thereof.

RC SYSTEMS                      - 11 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

Text mode

     In this mode, all text sent to DoubleTalk is spoken as complete
     sentences. Punctuation is also taken into consideration by the
     intonation generation algorithms. DoubleTalk will not begin
     translating text until it receives a CR (0dh) or Null (00h)
     character-this ensures that sentence boundaries receive the proper
     inflection. This is the default operating mode.


     Character mode

     This mode causes DoubleTalk to translate input text on a
     character-by-character basis; i.e., text will be spelled instead of
     spoken as words. DoubleTalk does not wait for a CR/Null in this mode.


     Phoneme mode

     This mode disables DoubleTalk's text-to-speech translator, allowing
     DoubleTalk's phonemes to be directly accessed. Phonemes in the input
     buffer will not be spoken until a CR or Null is received.


     Translation Accuracy

     Although DoubleTalk is able to convert English text into speech with a
     reasonable degree of accuracy, it will undoubtedly mispronounce some
     words, particularly those of foreign origin. These inaccuracies are
     rooted in the fact that the English language is a mixture of many
     languages, and hence a conglomeration of many pronunciation rules and
     exceptions.

     It is virtually impossible to define one set of pronunciation rules
     for the English language, as there will invariably be words which do
     not follow them. If the synthesizer isn't sure how to pronounce a
     particular word, it will make its best guess, sounding the word out
     with its internal pronunciation rules (much like we do when confronted
     with a word that we've never seen before). Infallible it's not, but
     the synthesizer is able to pronounce nearly 90% of the common English
     words accurately. If a word is mispronounced by the synthesizer, there
     are four ways to correct its pronunciation:

     1. Spell the word phonetically. For example, if the word read is to be
        pronounced "reed" instead of "red," spell it reed. Generally
        speaking, if a mispronounced word's spelling is changed so that it
        is spelled exactly like it sounds, it will be pronounced correctly.

     2. Hyphenate the word, breaking the word where it is mispronounced. A
        space character could also be used, but a hyphen works better as it
        will not generate the inter-word pause as a space may do. This
        method is generally used with compound words (e.g., base-ball).

     3. Teach DoubleTalk the way the word should be pronounced by defining
        an exception for it in DoubleTalk's exception dictionary.

     4. Use DoubleTalk's Phoneme mode.



     RC SYSTEMS                      - 12 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

Commands

     The commands described in the following pages provide the means of
     controlling DoubleTalk under software control. They can be used to
     vary the synthesizer's attributes, such as the volume or pitch, to
     suit the requirements of a particular application or listener's
     preferences.

     Commands can be freely intermixed with the text that is to be spoken,
     allowing the speech to be dynamically controlled. Unless otherwise
     noted, commands embedded in text affect only the text that follows the
     commands.


         NOTE  DoubleTalk commands can generally be used only
               from application programs that you write yourself.
               This is because most application programs prevent
               the commands from reaching DoubleTalk, virtually
               becoming a brick wall between you and DoubleTalk.
               Many talking programs, however, usually provide an
               indirect means of changing DoubleTalk's attributes
               via some sort of speech menu or command system.

               This restriction does not apply, however, if you
               are printing files from a program to DoubleTalk
               via DTPRN. Although DTPRN is essentially an
               application program capable of blocking commands,
               it was specifically written to pass all of the
               following commands on to DoubleTalk. Furthermore,
               DTPRN enables you to use an asterisk (*) as the
               command character, besides Control-A (see
               discussion below).


     Command formats

     All DoubleTalk commands are composed of a command character, a
     parameter n, and a letter which identifies the command. Some commands
     simply enable or disable a feature of DoubleTalk; these commands do
     not require a parameter. The command formats are:

          <command character><n><letter>
          <command character><letter>


     The command character

     The default DoubleTalk command character is Control-A (01h). The
     command character itself can be spoken by the synthesizer by sending
     it twice in a row: Control-A Control-A. This special command allows
     the command character to be spoken without affecting the operation of
     DoubleTalk, and without having to change to another command character
     and then back again.

RC SYSTEMS                      - 13 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

Changing the command character

     The command character can be changed to another control character by
     sending the current command character, followed by the new character.
     To change the command character to Control-D for example, issue the
     command Control-A Control-D. To change it back, issue the command
     Control-D Control-A. It's generally a good idea to change the command
     character if the forthcoming text contains characters which may
     otherwise be interpreted as command characters (and hence commands).

     The command character can be unconditionally reset to Control-A by
     sending Control-^ (1Eh) to DoubleTalk while operating in the Text,
     Character, or Phoneme modes.


     Command parameters

     Command parameters are composed of one or two-digit ASCII numbers.
     DoubleTalk supports two types of parameters: absolute and relative.
     Absolute parameters explicitly specify the parameter's new value, such
     as 9V or 3B. Relative parameters, on the other hand, specify a
     displacement in a parameter's value, not the actual new value itself.

     Relative parameters may specify a positive or negative displacement
     from a parameter's existing value. For example, the command +2V
     increases the current value of V by two (V + 2 -> V). If the current
     value of V is 4, it will increase to 6 after the command has executed.
     The command -2V will have a similar effect, except the V value will be
     decreased by two.

     If the value of a parameter falls outside the command's specified
     range, the value will wrap around, instead of being truncated. For
     example, if the current volume is 7 and the command +4V is issued, the
     resultant volume will be (7 + 4) - 10, or 1, since the volume range is
     0-9.

     When writing application programs for DoubleTalk, it is recommended
     that relative parameters be used for temporarily changing voice
     attributes (such as raising the pitch of a word), using
     absolute-parameter commands only once in the program's initialization
     routine. This way, if the base value of an attribute must be changed,
     it only needs to be changed in the initialization routine.


     Command Descriptions

     The following is a description of each of the software commands
     supported by DoubleTalk.


     E (Enable Intonation)

     Intonation is the variation of pitch throughout a sentence or phrase.
     When intonation is enabled, the synthesizer attempts to approximate
     the pitch patterns of human speech as closely as possible. For
     example, when a sentence ends with a period, the pitch drops at the
     end of the sentence. If a sentence ends with a question mark and the

RC SYSTEMS                      - 14 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

sentence does not begin with "wh" (who, what, where, etc.), the pitch
     rises-otherwise it falls, like a period.

     When intonation is enabled, the pitch will also vary in the Character
     and Phoneme modes. The pitch follows the same rules for punctuation as
     it does for Text mode.

     Intonation is normally enabled. To turn it off, use the Disable
     Intonation command, described next.

M (Disable Intonation)

     If automatic intonation is not desired, this command will cause the
     synthesizer to speak in a monotone voice. Intonation should be
     disabled whenever manual intonation is applied using the Pitch
     command.


     nF (Formant Frequency)

     This command adjusts the synthesizer's overall frequency response
     (vocal tract formant frequencies), over the range 0F through 9F. By
     varying the frequency, speech quality can be fine-tuned or voice type
     changed. The default frequency is 5F. Note that this command takes
     effect immediately - any text sent prior to the command will be spoken
     at the new formant frequency.

     This command has no effect on the DoubleTalk LT.


     nS (Speed)

     The synthesizer's overall rate (speed) of speech can be adjusted with
     this command, from 0S (slowest) through 9S (fastest). The default
     speed is 5S.


     nP (Pitch)

     This command varies the synthesizer's pitch over a wide range, which
     can be used to change the average pitch during speech, produce manual
     intonation, or create sound effects. Pitch values can range from 0P
     through 99P; the default is 50P.


     nV (Volume)

     This command controls the synthesizer's volume level. Volume commands
     can range from 0V through 9V; the default is 5V. The command 0V yields
     the lowest possible volume; maximum volume is attained at 9V. The
     command can be used to set a new listening level or create emphasis in
     speech.

RC SYSTEMS                      - 15 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

nX (Tone)

     The synthesizer supports two tone settings, bass (0X) and treble (1X),
     which work much like the bass and treble controls on a stereo. The
     best setting to use depends on the speaker being used and personal
     preference. Treble is the default setting.

nB (Punctuation Level)

     Depending on the application, it may be desirable to limit the
     speaking of certain punctuation. For example, if the synthesizer is
     used to proofread documents, the application may call for only unusual
     punctuation to be read. On the other hand, an application which orally
     echoes keyboard entries on a computer for a blind user may require
     that all punctuation be spoken.


          n    Punctuation Level

          0    All/Digits
          1    Most (all punctuation except
               CR, LF, Space)/Digits
          2    Some ($%&#@=+*^<>|/\)/Digits
          3    None/Digits
          4    All/Numbers
          5    Most/Numbers
          6    Some/Numbers
          7    None/Numbers

     Table 1.  Punctuation Levels


     DoubleTalk supports eight levels of punctuation, shown in Table 1.
     Besides determining which punctuation characters will be spoken and
     which will not, the Punctuation Level command also determines how
     number strings will be pronounced: as numbers (e.g., "one hundred
     twenty three") or digits ("one two three"). Levels 6 and 7 also cause
     currency strings to be read as they are normally spoken-for example,
     $11.95 is read as "eleven dollars and ninety five cents." The default
     punctuation level is 6B.


     nY (Timeout Delay)

     The Text and Phoneme modes of the synthesizer defer the translation
     and synthesis of the contents of the input buffer until a CR or Null
     is received. This ensures that text is spoken smoothly from word to
     word, and that the proper intonation is given to the beginning and
     ending of sentences. If text is sent to the synthesizer without a CR
     or Null, it will remain untranslated in the input buffer indefinitely.
     If it is expected that this condition may occur, use the Timeout
     command.

     DoubleTalk contains a software timer which forces the synthesizer to
     translate the buffer contents when the timer times out. The timer is
     enabled only if the Timeout parameter n is non-zero, the synthesizer



     RC SYSTEMS                      - 16 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT





     is not active (not talking), and the input buffer contains no CR or
     Null characters. Any characters sent to DoubleTalk before timeout will
     automatically restart the timer.


          n    Delay

          0    Indefinite (wait for CR/Null)
          1    200 milliseconds
          2    400 milliseconds
          3    600 milliseconds
          .
          .
          15   3000 milliseconds (3 sec.)

     Table 2.  Timeout Delays


     The Timeout parameter n specifies the number of 200 millisecond (.2
     sec) periods in the delay time, which can range from 200 milliseconds
     to 3 seconds (Table 2). The default value is zero, which disables the
     timer.


     L (Load Exceptions)

     This command purges DoubleTalk's exception dictionary of any
     exceptions and stores subsequent output from the host in the exception
     dictionary RAM. Since the memory used by the exception dictionary is
     the same physical RAM used by the input buffer, the space available
     for the input buffer is decreased proportionally by the size of the
     dictionary.

     The dictionary can be purged from DoubleTalk with the Reinitialize
     command, or by loading a "null" dictionary file into the dictionary
     RAM. Both methods reallocate the memory space occupied by the
     dictionary to the input buffer.

     Although exceptions are composed of standard ASCII characters, they
     must be compiled into the internal format used by DoubleTalk. The
     COMPILE.COM program included on the Developer's Tools disk is used to
     perform this task.

     The topic of writing exception dictionaries is somewhat complex for
     the average (sane) user, and is therefore left to the Developer's
     Tools disk.


     U (Enable Exceptions)

     The exception dictionary is enabled with this command. If the
     synthesizer is not in the Text or Character  modes, or if the
     exception dictionary is empty, the command will have no effect. The
     exception dictionary can be disabled by issuing one of the mode
     commands D, nT, or nC.

RC SYSTEMS                      - 17 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

R (Clear)

     The Clear command stops the synthesizer and clears the input buffer of
     all text and commands. None of the synthesizer settings are affected,
     but any untranslated commands will be ignored.

     An alternate, faster way to clear DoubleTalk is to write a Control-X
     (18h) character directly to DoubleTalk's I/O port. This also enables
     DoubleTalk to react immediately, even if its buffer is full.


     @ (Reinitialize)

     This command clears the input buffer (see Clear command) and restores
     all of the speech parameters to their default settings. The exception
     dictionary memory is also cleared and reallocated to the input buffer.


     Z (Zap Commands)

     This command prevents DoubleTalk from honoring subsequent commands,
     enabling it to read commands as they are issued (this can be useful
     for debugging some types of programs). Any pending commands in the
     input buffer will still be honored. The only way to restore command
     recognition after the Zap command has been issued is to perform a
     hardware reset.


     J (Tone Generators)

     DoubleTalk's tone generators are activated with this command. The tone
     generators are treated separately in the Developer's Tools.


     nT (Text Mode/Delay)

     This command places DoubleTalk in the Text translation mode. The
     optional delay parameter n can be used to create a variable pause
     between words. The shortest, and default delay of 0, is used for
     normal speech. For users not accustomed to synthesized speech, the
     synthesizer's intelligibility may be improved by using a longer delay.
     The longest delay that can be specified is 15. If the delay parameter
     is omitted, the current value will be used. This feature is useful for
     returning from another translation mode or disabling the exception
     dictionary (see Enable Exceptions command).


     nC (Character Mode/Delay)

     This command puts DoubleTalk in the Character translation mode. The
     optional delay parameter n specifies how long the synthesizer will
     pause between characters. Values between 0 (the default) and 15
     provide pauses from shortest to longest, respectively. Values between
     16 and 31 provide the same range of pauses, but control characters
     will not be spoken. If the delay parameter is omitted, the current
     value will be used.

RC SYSTEMS                      - 18 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

D (Phoneme Mode)

     This command disables the text-to-speech translator, allowing the
     synthesizer's phonemes to be accessed directly. Table 3 lists the
     phonemes that can be produced by DoubleTalk.

     When concatenating two or more phonemes, each phoneme must be
     delimited by a space. For example, the word "computer" would be
     represented phonetically as K AX M P YY UW T ER.


     Phoneme   Example             Phoneme   Example
     Symbol    Word                Symbol    Word

     A         das (Spanish)       M         mug
     AA        father              N         new
     AE        bat                 NX        rung
     AH        cut                 NY        nio (Spanish)
     AO        lawn                O         no (Spanish)
     AW        cow                 OW        tone
     AX        about               OY        boy
     AY        kite                P         past
     B         bird                PX        spot
     CH        cheese              R         ring
     D         dare                S         some
     DH        either              SH        dish
     DX        computer            T         tip
     E         ser (Spanish)       TH        thick
     EH        set                 TX        mistake
     EI        mesa (Spanish)      U         uno (Spanish)
     ER        were                UH        pull
     EY        bake                UW        tool
     F         fact                V         give
     G         give                W         went
     H         hire                WH        when
     I         libro (Spanish)     Y         mayo (Spanish)
     IH        sit                 YY        you
     IX        relative            Z         zero
     IY        meet                ZH        leisure
     JH        jet                 space     short pause *
     K         cute                ,         medium pause
     KX        ski                 .         long pause
     L         long

     Table 3.  Synthesizer Phonemes
     * Normally used between words; duration determined by nT command


     Phoneme attribute tokens

     Table 4 lists the voice attribute tokens that can be used in the
     Phoneme mode, in addition to the standard DoubleTalk commands. These
     tokens do not require the command character or any parameters.

     The / token temporarily increases the pitch by ten steps, whereas the
     \ token temporarily decreases the pitch ten steps. Besides only
     temporarily changing the pitch, the difference between the pitch



     RC SYSTEMS                      - 19 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT





     tokens and the +10P and -10P command equivalents is that the effective
     pitch range is extended beyond the normal 0-99 range by approximately
     20 steps, and if the pitch should fall out of range, it will simply
     bottom or top out, instead of wrap around.

     All other attribute token commands remain in effect until explicitly
     changed.


          Symbol    Function

          nn        Set pitch to 'nn' (0-99)
          /         Increase pitch 10 steps
          \         Decrease pitch 10 steps
          +         Increase speed 1 step
          -         Decrease speed 1 step
          >         Increase volume 1 step
          <         Decrease volume 1 step

     Table 4.  Phoneme Attribute Tokens


     Applications of Phoneme mode

     Phoneme mode is useful for creating customized speech, when the normal
     text-to-speech (Text) mode is inappropriate for producing the desired
     voice effect. For example, Phoneme mode should be used when it is
     important that the correct stress or emphasis be placed on specific
     words in a phrase. This is because Phoneme mode allows voice
     attributes to be modified on phoneme boundaries within each word,
     whereas Text mode allows changes only at word boundaries. This is
     illustrated in the following program examples.

       100 A$ = CHR$(1)
       105 LPRINT A$;"D";A$;"M"
       110 LPRINT "70H AW  -/D>/EH R  +<\\YY UW   S P\IY K   T UW
           \M IY   DH AE T  -\W EY .+/"

     Note in line 105 that the synthesizer's intonation is disabled, since
     the pitch variations due to the internal intonation algorithms would
     otherwise interfere with the pitch tokens. Compare this with the same
     phrase produced in Text mode with intonation enabled:

       100 A$ = CHR$(1)
       105 LPRINT A$;"T";A$;"E"
       110 LPRINT "How dare you speak to me that way!"

     Phoneme mode is also useful in applications which provide their own
     text-to-phoneme translation, such as the front end of a text-to-speech
     system.


     n# (PCM Mode)

     This command activates DoubleTalk's PCM mode. This is an advanced
     topic discussed in the Developer's Tools.

RC SYSTEMS                      - 20 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

nG (Protocol Options)

     This command sets up various protocol options in the DoubleTalk LT
     synthesizer. The command has no effect in the DoubleTalk PC
     synthesizer. Refer to the Developer's Tools for more information.


     nI (Index Marker)

     Index markers are non-speaking "bookmarks" that a program can use to
     keep track of exactly where DoubleTalk is speaking within a string of
     text. Since this is a command only programmers would use, it is
     covered in the Developer's Tools.


     Command Summary

     Table 5 is a summary of the commands supported by DoubleTalk's text-
     to-speech synthesizer.

Command      Function                      Range     Default

            nB         Punctuation level              0-7         6
            nC         Character mode/delay           0-31        0
            D          Phoneme mode                    -          -
            E          Enable intonation               -          -
            nF         Formant frequency (PC only)    0-9         5
            nG         Protocol options (LT only)     0-15        10
            nI         Index marker                   0-99        -
            J          Tone generator                  -          -
            L          Load exception dictionary       -          -
            M          Disable intonation              -          -
            nP         Pitch                          0-99        50
            R          Clear                           -          -
            nS         Speed                          0-9         5
            nT         Text mode/delay                0-15        0
            U          Enable exception dictionary     -          -
            nV         Volume                         0-9         5
            nX         Tone                           0-1         1
            nY         Timeout delay                  0-15        0
            Z          Zap commands                    -          -
            @          Reinitialize                    -          -
            n#         PCM mode                       0-99        -

     Table 5.  Command Summary

RC SYSTEMS                      - 21 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

APPENDIX A
     LPC Word Lists

     File: WORDS1
     Gender: male
     # words: 206

     zero          0       one           5       two          10
     three        15       four          1       five          6
     six          11       seven        16       eight         2
     nine          7       ten          12       eleven       17
     twelve        3       thir-         8       fif-         13
     teen         18       twenty        4       hundred       9
     thousand     14

     A            38       abort        72       about        78
     adjust      147       alert       146       all         111
     alpha        45       amps         96       and         172
     area        138       at          109       automatic    69

     B            19       between     148       bravo        48
     break       186       button      150

     C            26       calibrate   188       call         73
     cancel      112       caution     175       change       62
     charlie      50       check       177       circuit     139
     clock       151       complete    101       connect     140
     control     107       crane       189       cycle        74

     D            32       danger       60       days        113
     degrees     178       delta        47       device      152
     direction   190       display      75       door        114
     down        182

     E            39       east        153       echo         46
     electrician 108       enter       191       equal        76
     exit        115

     F            20       fail        154       farad       173
     fast         77       feet        192       fire         99
     flow        116       foxtrot      49       frequency   155
     from        193

     G            27       gallons     129       gate        156
     gauge       117       get         194       go           79
     golf         51       green       118

     H            33       henry        52       hertz       135
     high        157       hold        195       hours       187

     I            40       inch         80       india        91
     inspector   119       intruder    158       is          145

     J            21       juliet      130

     K            28       kilo        168

RC SYSTEMS                      - 22 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

L            34       left        196       light       176
     lima         53       line         66       low          81

     M            41       machine     105       manual      120
     measure     159       mega         97       meter        59
     micro       136       mike         92       mill        197
     milli       174       minus        63       minutes     149
     motor        82       move        121

     N            22       north       160       not          64
     november    131       number      183

     O            29       of          198       off          67
     ohms        137       on          106       open         83
     operator     90       oscar       169       out         184
     over        122

     P            35       papa         54       pass        161
     passed      199       percent      84       pico         98
     plus        123       point       185       position    162
     power       100       press       200       pressure     61
     probe        85       pull        124       push        163

     Q            42       quebec       93

     R            23       range       201       ready        86
     red         110       repair      102       repeat      125
     right       164       romeo       132

     S            30       safe        202       seconds     141
     service     179       set          87       shut        126
     sierra      170       slow        165       smoke        71
     south       203       speed        88       start        65
     stop        104       switch      180

     T            36       tango        55       temperature 103
     test        127       the          57       time         68
     timer       143       tool        166       turn        204

     U            43       under        89       uniform      94
     unit        142       up          144

     V            24       valve       181       victor      133
     volts       128

     W            31       wait         70       watts        58
     west        167       whiskey     171

     X            37       x-ray        56

     Y            44       yankee       95       yellow      205

     Z            25       zulu        134

RC SYSTEMS                      - 23 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

File: WORDS2
     Gender: female
     # words: 35

     the           0       time          1       is            2
     a.m.          3       p.m.          4       oh            5
     o'clock       6       one           7       two           8
     three         9       four         10       five         11
     six          12       seven        13       eight        14
     nine         15       ten          16       eleven       17
     twelve       18       thirteen     19       fourteen     20
     fifteen      21       sixteen      22       seventeen    23
     eighteen     24       nineteen     25       twenty       26
     thirty       27       forty        28       fifty        29
     good         30       morning      31       afternoon    32
     evening      33       (pause)      34

RC SYSTEMS                      - 24 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

APPENDIX B
     Specifications


     DoubleTalk PC


        Processor (CPU) -  Intel 80C188EB running at 10 MHz

        On Board Memory -  128K ROM, 8K RAM (32K optional)

       Supported Speech
           Technologies -  Text-to-speech (TTS), LPC, PCM,
                           ADPCM, CVSD

        Tone Generators -  3, programmable

           Programmable
             Parameters -  TTS: 3 translation modes, manual/auto
                           intonation, 10 speeds, 10 formant frequencies,
                           100 pitches, 10 volume levels, 2 tone levels,
                           16 word/character delays, 16 timeout
                           delays, 8 punctuation levels

                           LPC: 4K data buffer, 2 speeds,
                           repeat function

                           PCM: 4K data buffer, 100 playback sampling
                           rates (4 kHz to 11.1 kHz), 10 volume levels

                           TGN: 255 volume levels, 65,535 tempos,
                           255 pitches, 255 tone durations

     Audio Output Power -  0.5 W (8 ohms); output from standard
                           1/8" monaural jack

             System IRQ
           Requirements -  none

             System DMA
           Requirements -  none

          System Memory
           Requirements -  none

             System I/O
           Requirements -  2 ports (user selectable)

      Power Consumption -  90 mA maximum active, 25 mA standby
                           (+5 V supply)

                   Size -  3.9" x 5.1"

RC SYSTEMS                      - 25 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT

DoubleTalk LT


        Processor (CPU) -  Intel 80C188EB running at 8.3 MHz

        On Board Memory -  128K ROM, 8K RAM (32K optional)

       Supported Speech
           Technologies -  Text-to-speech (TTS), LPC, PCM,
                           ADPCM, CVSD

        Tone Generators -  3, programmable

           Programmable
             Parameters -  TTS: 3 translation modes, manual/auto
                           intonation, 10 speeds, 100 pitches,
                           10 volume levels, 2 tone levels,
                           16 word/character delays, 16 timeout
                           delays, 8 punctuation levels

                           LPC: 4K data buffer, 2 speeds,
                           repeat function

                           PCM: 4K data buffer, 8 kHz playback
                           sampling rate (other rates attainable
                           by up/down sampling), 10 volume levels

                           TGN: 255 volume levels, 65,535 tempos,
                           255 pitches, 255 tone durations

     Audio Output Power -  0.5 W (8 ohms); output from internal
                           speaker or built in 1/8" stereo jack

      Power Consumption -  70 mA maximum active, 25 mA standby
                           (AC adapter or 9 V alkaline battery)

               Protocol -  9600 baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit,
                           no parity, RTS/CTS handshaking

                   Size -  5.3" x 4.0" x 1.5"

                 Weight -  11 oz (without battery)

RC SYSTEMS                      - 26 -                DOUBLETALK PC/LT
