Dolphin Speech Synthesiser User Guide
Series 2 Synthesiser  

Copyright:
            dolphin,
            systems for people with disabilities,
            PO Box 83,
            Worcester WR3 8TU
            Tel: 01905 754577    Int: +44  1905  754577
            Fax: 01905 754559    Int: +44  1905  754559
                                          synthman 2.02


Dolphin Series 2 Synthesisers

Introduction

The Dolphin Series 2 Synthesisers have been developed in parallel with the
HAL5 screen reader and other Dolphin special access products. They provide an
affordable and powerful means of multilingual speech output, and can be used
with a large variety of popular computer packages.

All of Dolphin's Series 2 Synthesisers have the following features:

*    Advanced PC communications including indexing.
*    Easy control over the pitch, speed, intonation, and other aspects
     of the speech.
*    Over forty different languages available, with up to seven languages
     in one synthesiser.

Varieties

There are currently four Dolphin speech synthesisers:

*    Apollo 2
*    PC 2 card
*    Juno
*    Gemini

All the synthesisers have the same features and command set, except that the
Juno and Gemini have a software volume control.

Apollo 2

This is a mains-only desktop synthesiser with an integral loudspeaker. It is
connected to your PC's serial port.

It is ideal for use in situations where an integral loudspeaker is required.

PC 2 card

This is essentially an Apollo 2, but mounted on a PC card. It has all the
features of the Apollo 2, and is ideal for use in a sole stationary computer,
where you want the speech synthesiser to be tucked away. Because it fits
inside the PC you have no need for an external power supply, and will have no
trailing wires.

Juno

The Juno is a battery-powered, serial-only portable synthesiser, with all the
functions of the Apollo 2. Complete with a built-in loudspeaker, it is small
enough to be attached to any laptop computer and has about 10 hours battery
life.

Gemini

The Gemini is a type 2  PCMCIA card portable synthesiser which can be used
with laptop computers which contain type 2 or 3 PCMCIA expansion slots. It
functions the same as an Apollo 2 synthesiser and draws its power from the
laptop`s battery. Headphones or and external speaker must be used with the
Gemini as there is no internal speaker.

This synthesiser is very small and ideal for portable computers. 


Section One - The Apollo 2

This section contains a description of the Apollo 2 speech synthesiser. 

Introduction

The Apollo 2 is a mains-powered text-to speech synthesiser which can be used
with a wide range of computers. It can be used in conjunction with portable
computers, as well as with desktop models. The Apollo 2 is one of the very
few synthesisers which has a British English voice, and many non-English
languages are also available. It is possible to have up to 4 languages
resident in the Apollo 2 at any time. Language ROMs can also be updated or 
changed as required.

The following is a description of the connectors and controls on the Apollo 2.
(The description assumes that you have the Apollo 2 speaker facing you.)
There are three connectors as follows.

Connectors

1.   The 9 way D-Type connector at the back is a serial port. It is used to
     connect to the computer.
 
     The connector is wired in a non-standard way so unless you have made you
     own cable as per the pin-out in Appendix 1, you should only use Dolphin
     serial cables.

     If you plug a 'standard' serial cable into the socket you may blow up
     the communications port of the synthesiser. For connection to an IBM
     PC/AT or compatible you will receive a cable with 9 way female
     connectors at each end. The cable can be plugged in either way round.

2.   The connector on the front is for a headphone set or extension speaker.
     It is a stereo 3.5mm socket (such as found on Walkman-type headphones),
     and will not work correctly if a mono jack is used.

3.   The last connector is to the rear, and is for the mains adaptor.

Note: Please use only a Dolphin mains adaptor as supplied. If using your own
mains adaptor ensure that the voltage, current capacity and polarity are
correct. These details can be found in Appendix 1.

Controls

The only controls provided on the Apollo 2 are the on/off switch and the
volume knob. The on/off switch is located to the rear, left hand side. Left
is on, right is off. The volume control is located on top of the unit, to the
left, just below the speaker grill.

On switching on the synthesiser, the synthesiser will self-test and issue a
sound effect dependent on the result.

If the test is OK the synthesiser issues a short single buzz,  but if it 
fails three longer hoots are sounded.

Overleaf is a diagram of the Apollo 2. On the following  page are the front
and back panels of the Apollo 2.


Section Two - The PC 2 Card

This section contains information on the PC 2 card, including guidelines on
installation.
   
Introduction

The PC 2 Card is an IBM PC/AT compatible card that will fit inside both
desktop PCs and portable PCs which  have a standard card slot. 

The card is capable of holding up to seven languages by way of the four
on-board ROM sockets. The first ROM socket is a 256Kb ROM and can hold four
languages. The other three ROM sockets are 64Kb and can hold one language.
The first socket can also hold a normal 64Kb ROM. The physical size of the
card is 20.3cm back to front by 9.9cm high, not including the edge connector. 

Fitting the Card

When fitting the card to your PC try not to touch the edge connector as you
may damage the card. Select a spare slot and plug the card in firmly. You may
have to bend the face plate slightly to enable securing of the locking screw.
This will depend on the card cage of your PC. The card is almost ready for
use as you need only plug in either your headphones or external speaker. If
you wish to use the internal speaker of your PC the section 'Using the PC's
Internal Speaker' has information on how to do this.

Controls and Connections

The Edge Connector

The edge connector on the Card is the hardware communication path with the
computer. It is a standard 8-bit, IBM PC slot connector but will work
perfectly well in  a 16-bit AT slot. The card will not work in a MCA type
slot as found on certain IBM PS/2 machines.

Sockets and Volume Control

The card has a volume control, 'spindle' type, to the rear of the machine and
two 3.5mm stereo jacks on the face plate. This will appear on the back or
side of your PC, dependent on the orientation of your card cage, once the
card is fitted. 

There are two stereo sockets on the card. The 'top' one (closest to the pot)
is the normal output to connect headphones/speakers. The lower socket is a 
'line' output that will be useful for active speakers, connecting to an
external amplifier etc. If this socket is used, the headphone socket is
disabled. The card does not have a speaker on-board, however, you can connect
the computer's internal speaker, see below. There are jumpers for selecting
port addresses. These are discussed in detail in Appendix 4

Using the Card with Software

If you are using HAL5 you can drive the PC 2 card at the default address by
using the following address:

HAL5 card

If you have changed the card address to the secondary value (as per Appendix
4) then you can drive the card with the following command:

HAL5 card792

If you are using a special address then include the address in the following
command:

HAL5 card***    (special address)

The On-Board ROMs

The PC 2 Card has four on-board ROM sockets, one can hold 4 languages. The
other three ROMs can hold only 1 language. The default ROM socket, i.e. the
language ROM the card will use when you first turn on the computer, is the
one furthest from the volume control. The second ROM (ROM2) would normally be
selected automatically, if you are using HAL5, when you changed language
prompt files. To change ROMs outside of HAL5 (it actually does the same thing
internally) you can use the '@=' command. '@=1' will start the default ROM and
'@=2' will start ROM2 etc.

Using the PC's Internal Speaker

It is possible to use the internal speaker of your computer for both speech
and computer audio output. This will not work successfully with small piezo
speakers sometimes found on portables and some desktops, it should really be
a standard moving cone type. 

This facility has two advantages in that you do not need an external speaker
with its associated cable, and when using headphones you can hear both speech
and computer beeps without disturbing colleagues. (A talking beeping PC can
be quite a distraction in a busy office environment!).

The method of connecting the PC beeps/speaker is different now, you can
connect the 4 pin socket from the PC speaker directly to the 4 pin plug on
the card (J6), and then a single wire connects between J3 on the card and the
output on the PC motherboard.


Section Three - The Juno

This section contains a description of  the Juno portable speech synthesiser. 
 
Introduction

The Juno has been designed by Dolphin as a battery powered synthesiser that
can be used in portable applications where the desktop Apollo 2 or the PC 2
card may not be suitable. The Juno has built in rechargeable batteries, has
all the features of the Apollo 2, and is totally software controlled.
(This means you must use a program such as the HAL5 screen reader to alter
the volume.) -This version of the Juno has a built-in loudspeaker.

Note: The Juno automatically powers on when the PC or laptop's serial port has
been initialised and a speaker or headphones have been plugged in. It will
power off when the PC is powered off, or the serial connector is unplugged.

The On-Board ROMs

The Juno has a single ROM slot, and can accommodate up to four languages on a
single ROM. Language switching and audio volume changes are made under
software control from the PC.


Section Four - The Gemini

This section contains a description of the Gemini PCMCIA speech synthesiser.

Introduction

The Gemini has been designed to allow laptop users more portability when
using their laptop computers. In order to use the Gemini, your computer must
contain a free type 2 or type 3 PCMCIA slot and be running either CardSoft,
Cardware, Windows 95 or have a PCIC compatible PCMCIA socket controller.
When plugged in and initially configured the synthesiser will be configured
via its own internal serial port and can then be used as a standard Dolphin
serial synthesiser.

Sockets and Volume Controls

The Gemini can support up to four languages and these along with the volume
control are accessed from your PC via a suitable screen reader and hot key
combination. 

Personal stereo type headphones or an external speaker can be connected to
the unit and must have a 3.5mm stereo plug in order to avoid damage to the
synthesiser. It is also recommended that the connecting cable should not be
longer than three metres.

Using the Gemini with Card & Socket Services

When using CardSoft or Cardware your computer will recognise the synthesiser
as a COM port and give it the number of the next available one on your
computer. HAL5 should auto detect the synthesiser connected to this port when
you initially install the screen reader. With older copies of  HAL you will
need to first initialise this new COM port with the DOS "mode" command and
then tell HAL to which COM port it should be communicating. An example follows;

If the Gemini has previously been set as COM2

MODE COM2:96,n,8,1

HAL -2d

Using the Gemini with Windows 95

With Windows 95 your computer will automatically detect the card being
inserted and, at the first instance, ask what it is and if you have a driver
disk containing information on the unit. You can select the Windows 95
standard serial port driver from a list of alternatives. 

NOTE: When using the synthesiser with Windows 95 you must always ask to
unplug the unit before removing it in order to avoid crashing your system
should you decide to unplug the unit while it is switched on. 


Section Five - The Dolphin Speaker And Splitter Box 

This section provides a description of the Dolphin speaker and splitter box
which can be used in conjunction with a Dolphin synthesiser.

Introduction

The  Dolphin Speaker and Splitter box has a design similar in style to the
Apollo synthesiser (see Section One). The easiest way of telling the different
variants of the Apollo, the Speaker and the Splitter box is by their switches.
With the case facing you on the desk, an Apollo has a single switch on the
back left hand corner, a Splitter box has a switch on the back right hand 
corner, and a Speaker has no switches at all. 

The Speaker

The Speaker case is identical to the Apollo 2.03, except that the base is 
about 10mm shallower. The plug fitted to the lead is a stereo 3.5mm jack plug.
The cover contains a volume control and a stereo socket. While the speaker
obviously has no benefits to people with Apollos, users who would like a
'real' volume control for a Juno (especially the old non SP!!!), and PC card
users who want the volume control and headphone socket at the front of the
PC, may like the speaker.

Depending on what it is connected to, plugging in the speaker should 
disconnect any internal speakers, and similarly, plugging headphones into a 
speaker will turn the speaker off. 

Another feature of the Speaker is that it can also be modified as a Splitter 
box.

The Splitter

The Splitter box comes as a stand alone unit which can also be a speaker when 
the headphones are disconnected, or built into an Apollo 2.

An other feature of the Splitter box is that a switch can be added to the 
cover, and the output from a dictation machine can be wired in. When used
like this the output from the synthesiser will be heard through one ear and 
the dictation machine will be heard in the other ear. Similarly by flicking 
the switch, the synthesiser will be heard in both ears.

This is only the case when the headphones are plugged in. Without the
headphones the synthesiser is heard through the speaker which ever way the 
switch is set. The volume control will only effect the synthesiser's output.

Incorporation 

The Speaker will be included in the 'PC2' and 'Gemini' (PCMCIA card) systems 
in the UK. It can also be purchased separately. Overseas customers can 
purchase it as an accessory.


Section Six - Trouble Shooting

This section contains information on common problems people find with their 
Dolphin speech synthesisers. Read this section if you are having difficulty.

Introduction

If your synthesiser does not function please check the following points. 

1.   With an Apollo check that your mains adaptor is plugged all the way 
     into the synthesiser and that it is plugged into the mains and turned on. 

2.   The synthesiser should issue a 'healthy' sound effect when powered up.

3.   With an Apollo 2 or Juno  you should check that the data cable is
     plugged in correctly and into the right communication port on your
     computer.

4.   With cards, you must ensure that the card is fitted into its slot
     correctly and that a speaker or headphone set is attached.

5.   If using the HAL5 screen reader, have you used the correct command line
     parameter for your synthesiser?  Check with the following list:

HAL5 com1 <ENTER>       speech output to COM1:

HAL5 com2 <ENTER>       speech output to COM2:

HAL5 card <ENTER>       speech output to a PC 2 Card

HAL5 card792 <ENTER>    speech output to a PC 2 Card secondary address

6.   If when using cards, you still have no speech output after checking point
     3, then you may already have a card installed that is using the same
     address as the PC3 card. (See Appendix 3, "Address Selection", for
     further details.)

If all else fails, phone the Dolphin distributor in your country, or Dolphin 
Ltd. in the UK on 01905 754577. (Intl: +44 1905 754577) between 9am and 5pm.


Section Seven - The Complete Command Set

This section contains a complete command set for the Dolphin series 2 speech
synthesisers. These commands tell you how to control your synthesiser.

Introduction

This guide covers ROM types from version 2A onwards. Most of the ROM commands
start with an '@' (at sign) and are followed by an ASCII character or Hex,
Decimal, Octal or Binary number as indicated by c, h, d, o or b. When a
Binary number is indicated you will generally find this is a toggle switch
where '0' turns the command off and '1' turns the command on.

Note: The default settings shown below are for UK English. <ENTER> stands for
carriage return.

General Commands

@Wd
Controls the speed of the speech. Default = 3, and the range of values is 1
to 9, giving speeds of approximately 80 to 580 words per minute.

@Fh
Sets the centre point of the voice pitch. Default = 8

@Fc
'c' must be either '+' or '-'. This causes the pitch to be raised or lowered
slightly.

@Ro
Sets the level of prosody or excitability of the voice. Default = 3

@Sb
Toggles spell mode on or off. Default = 0

@Pb
Toggles punctuation on or off. Default = 0

@Qd
Sets the length of pause between words. Default = 0

@Bd
This is used to set the degree of voicing. 1 is a whisper (very breathy) and
8 is full voicing. Default = 8

@Dh
Sets the pause for end of phrase, breath group or sentence. Default = b

@Vd
One of the six preset voices may be selected with this command. The first
three voices (1 to 3) are based on a male voice and the last three voices
(4 to 6) are based on a non-male voice. Many more voices can be obtained by
using the commands below. Note: '@V0' will turn the voice off.

@Kb
Selects the male or non-male speaker table. 0 for male, 1 for non-male.

Control X
This is the mute command. The speech buffer is flushed and speech stops 
immediately.

@Ah
The command @Ah where h is a hexadecimal digit '0' to 'F', will set the 
volume control to the selected level. That level, h, is a proportion of the
level set by the physical volume control.

The action of the @A command is synchronised with the speech so that the 
loudness of the parts of an utterance can be controlled. For example:

Quietest    @A0
Normal      @AA
Loudest     @AF

@?
Speaks the ROM version number.

@=d,
This command will switch from one internal language ROM to another. 

@=1,    Selects ROM 1 (default ROM)
@=2,    Selects ROM 2
@=3,    Selects ROM 3
@=4,    Selects ROM 4

As standard the Apollo 2 has only one ROM of  64k. Additional languages can
be ordered.

The comma is not really part of the command, but should be included, otherwise
any text between the @=d and the end of the current phrase will be lost. 

When switching between ROMs of the same version number the Apollo 2 will do
this without having to reset any communications circuitry.

However, if  the ROM versions are different, the switch will still occur, but
by the synthesiser resetting itself.

@Gb
This command has no effect for Apollo 2 ROMs from version 2 on. In earlier
versions it turned the greeting on or off when switching languages.

@Th
This command can be inserted in your text to produce sound effects. The sound
effects available are:

h    duration      type of effect
0    very short    whoosh
1    short         "
2    medium        "
3    long          "
4    very short    buzzer
5    short         "
6    medium        "
7    long          "
8    very short    warble 1
9    short         "
A    medium        "
B    long          "
C    very short    warble 2
D    short         "
E    medium        "
F    long          "

Advanced Commands

Please note that you will probably not need to use the following commands
during day-to-day use of your synthesiser.

@Hb
Toggles Hypermode on or off. With Hypermode on only content words are spoken,
as in a telegram. Default = 0

@+c
This command has no effect for Apollo 2 ROMs from version 2 on. In earlier 
versions it sets 'c' to be the new command start character (i.e. 'c' is used 
as the new start character for a command string instead of @).

@Ec
Echoes back a character, where c is an alphanumeric character. See Appendix 4
for details of the communications protocols required.

@L
Asks for a list of its languages. The reply message sent to the PC is:

L,  n,  s,  data  <ENTER>

where: 'L' is a reply identifier, n gives the number of records in the message
in hexadecimal, and s gives the size of each record. The n records then 
follow in slot number order. Both n and s are transmitted low nibble first.
The format of each record is:

language code, extn, eng_ver, lang_ver

where: lang_code is the country code for the language, e.g. 00044 for UK.
The first character is used where more than one language is used in that 
country, so Welsh will be 10044. Ext will be used in the future to indicate 
a language extension slot. Some languages will require more than one slot. 
ext is '0' for all languages now. Eng_ver and lang_ver are four bytes each 
giving the engine and language version number for the slot. The message is 
terminated with a carriage return, <ENTER>.

@Mhh
This sets the mark-space ratio which can be described as having an effect on 
the depth of the voice. The valid range is 0 to 3F, the default is 16.

@Tx
A 'silent' sound effect giving a short pause of about 100ms.

@Ymrpb
Changes the synthesiser serial communications settings, where: 

m    selects the communication mode and is:
     H or h for half-duplex
     F or f for full-duplex
r    selects the baud rate:
     1   300
     2   1200
     3   9600  (Power up default)
     4   19200
     5   28800
     6   57600
p    selects the parity:
     E or e for Even
     O or o for Odd
     N or n for None (Power up default)
b    selects the number of data bits:
     7    7 data bits
     8    8 data bits(power up default)

For example, in order to set the synthesiser communications to 19.2 Kbits/sec,
odd parity, 7 data bits, and to use full-duplex communications, the command
would be:  @Yf407

The next five characters are synchronisation bytes and are not spoken. Any 
communication error during synchronisation causes the synthesiser to revert 
to the default settings.

@c?
Where c is one of A, B, C, D, F, H, K, M, P, Q, R, S, V, W, X, Z, =, or $

These are the characters used above in the 'at' commands to adjust the 
synthesisers' settings. Sending the @c? command to the synthesiser will 
produce a reply consisting of three characters. The first of these is the 
setting identifier, such as B for breathiness, followed by two characters 
(bytes) representing the hexadecimal value of that setting, which are sent in 
the order low-nibble then high-nibble.

For example, to ask the synthesiser for its current volume setting, send @A?.
The synthesiser will reply with the message A60, where 6 is the current
volume level.

@A?
Return the current volume setting.

@B?
Returns the current breathiness level.

@C?
Checks the battery level and charging state in a Juno. The reply is Cab where 
a is 1 if the battery is low or b is 1 if a charger is connected. If b is 0 
then the charge state is unknown and if b is 2 no charger is conected

@D?
Returns the current end of phrase pause setting.

@F?
Returns the current pitch centre point setting.

@H?
Returns the current Hypermode setting.

@K?
Returns the current speaker table setting.

@M?
Returns the current mark-space ratio setting.

@P?
Returns the current punctuation setting.

@Q?
Returns the current inter-word pause setting.

@R?
Returns the current prosody setting.

@S?
Returns the current spell mode setting.

@V?
Returns the current voice setting.

@W?
Returns the current speed setting.

@X?
Returns the current phonetic mode setting.

@=?
Returns the slot number of the selected ROM.

@$?
Returns the current voice source and filter setting.

@I?
This feature is available on serial Apollo 2, Juno, and PC 2 card
synthesisers. On receipt of @I?, the synthesiser will respond with a 4 byte
message:

I a b T/M

Where I indicates the message is an index message, and a and b are two ASCII
characters representing the one byte hexadecimal text unit counter. 

The final character T/M represents whether the synthesiser is Talking or 
Mute, e.g. the synthesiser may have 10 text units in its text buffer but is
not talking as it has not yet received a comma, full stop etc.

On receipt of a mute command, the normal muting operations take place, and 
the current values of the indexing flag and unit count are preserved. 

If the screen reader needs to know the index status, it must send @I? before 
issuing another @I+ which will clear the index flag and counter.

@I+
To enable indexing, words or text units must be counted up as they are
received. 

The synthesiser detects that indexing is on by the presence of the first @I+
command after a mute when it zeros a text-unit count. The text-unit counter
is a single byte representing the number of units remaining to be spoken by 
the synthesiser. When indexing is on, the synthesiser will increment the unit 
count whenever it receives an @I+.

Whenever one of these marks is due to be spoken it is not sent to the
synthesiser chip but causes the unit counter to be decremented. So, the 
Apollo 2 will keep track of how far the communications with the PC, and 
hence the application, are ahead of the speech synthesiser.

Special Voice Commands

These commands have been provided for you to experiment with the sounds of the
synthesiser. Most users will never need them. 

Commands to modify Formants

@udhh+ / @udhh-
Here 'd' is used to select one of the ten parameters in the table below. h-
or h+ can be used to add or subtract the hex value (h) from the selected 
parameter (d). The fourth formant is fixed.

Parameter    Value of d
0            Fn frequency of nasal formant.
1            F1 frequency of first formant.
2            F2 frequency of second formant.
3            F3 frequency of third formant.
4            ALF low frequency amplitude.
5            A1 amplitude of first formant.
6            A2 amplitude of second formant.
7            A3 amplitude of third formant.
8            A4 amplitude of fourth formant.
9            IV degree of voicing. Same command as @B

Voice Source & Filter

@$o
This command selects the voice source and filter as per the table below.
Default = 0

Value of o    Voice Filter    Voicing Source
0             male            default
1             female          default
2             male            spike
3             female          spike
4             male            cut-down default
5             female          cut-down default
6             male            reduced high frequency filter
7             female          reduced high frequency filter


Section Eight - Using an Apollo 2 with a BBC or BBC Master System

Introduction

The Apollo 2 speech synthesiser can be connected to a BBC computer serial
port and used only at a baud rate of 9600.

The serial port is located at the back of the computer and is labelled
'RS423'. The actual position of this port varies slightly depending on which
model of BBC computer you have. The plug which fits this socket is a domino
plug. This means that it is symmetrical and can therefore be fitted either way
round. However, the synthesiser will not work unless it is fitted correctly.
The correct way is when the head of the screw in the plug casing faces to the
right, as viewed from the back of the computer. 

It is possible to add speech to BBC basic programs by incorporating one of the
following procedures.

Serial Port Procedure 

    20000  DEFPROCSAY (Q$)
    20010  *FX3,7
    20020  PRINT Q$ ''
    20030  *FX3,0
    20040  ENDPROC

After adding the above procedure it is necessary to call this up at the
appropriate part of the program. For example, if a program prints the message
"Very Good" on the screen, locate the point in the program where this is
generated, and add an additional line. In the example below line 3000 is in
the original program, line 3005 will make the synthesiser say the same.

    3000 PRINT TAB (5,20) "Very Good"
    3005 PROCSAY ("Very Good")

The same procedure could be used to make a program which checks the ROM
version.

    10  PROCSAY ("@?")
    20  DEFPROCSAY (Q$)
    30  *FX3,7
    40  PRINT Q$ ''
    50  *FX3,0
    60  ENDPROC

Software is available for the BBC and the BBC Master System. For more
Information contact the Dolphin HelpDesk.

BBC Master Settings

The BBC Master series can cause confusion as it has a default protocol that
is battery backed (as with time and date) and does not match the synthesiser.
This default can be changed in the following way noting that all entries are
in upper case.

*CO. BAUD 7 <ENTER>  followed by hard break
*CO. DATA 4 <ENTER>  followed by hard break

'Hard break' means hold the control key down and tap the break key. The two
commands above should set the protocol to 9600 baud, 8 data bits and one stop
bit.


Appendix One - Apollo 2 Physical  Characteristics

Weight          325 grams
Size            11.5cm (l) x 13cm (b) x 7cm (h)
Power Source    The DC supply should be 13 volts, 300 milliamps, 2.1mm barrel.
                The polarity is negative tip, positive barrel.  
Connector       Serial with default of 9600 baud, 8 data bits and 1 stop bit.  

Pin-outs

Serial port
2    TX
3    RX
4    DSR
5    GND
6    DTR
7    CTS
8    RTS

Baud Rate

The Baud rate is now software selectable.

Headphone    3.5mm stereo jack, left and right lines shorted.
Controls     On/Off switch, Volume control.


Appendix Two - Juno with Nickel Metal Hydride Batteries Physical
Characteristics

Weight    450 grams
Size      15.0cm (l),  7.5cm (b),  5.0cm (h)

Power Source

* Battery Type
The Juno contains a Nickel Metal Hydride battery pack with a maximum voltage
of 7.2 volts and a capacity of 900mAhr. 

* Current Consumption
The current drawn by the Juno is dependent on volume and also whether it is
speaking. The circuit draws about 60mA when silent and about 110mA when
talking at maximum volume.

* Battery Life
A battery life of 10 hours, continuous speaking, is achievable. The batteries
can be recharged in three and a half hours and 800 charge/recharge cycles are
possible at 100% depth of discharge. For optimum battery life, it is
recommended that the battery pack should be fully discharged before the next
recharge cycle.

* Mains Adaptor
For optimum life, the Juno should not be used with the mains adaptor
connected. It should be fully charged, then used on batteries until they run
flat, when it can be recharged again. There is circuitry to protect the Juno
from reverse mains adaptor connection and also to prevent the batteries from
being over-charged and over-discharged.

The mains adaptor requirements are as follows:

Voltage - 13V DC
Maximum current - 300mA
Connection - 2.1mm (Negative tip)

Supplying Power from your Own Equipment

To charge the batteries and drive the circuit properly, you need to supply a
voltage of at least 13V.

If the batteries are not fitted then the 8.4V regulator can be removed and the
circuit can be supplied with a voltage of between 5.5V and 9V.

If the 5V regulator is removed then the circuit will just about run off 5V.
(The audio will clip at maximum volume.)

Connections

* Data
The data connection between the Juno and the PC is made with a flying 500mm
lead terminated in a 9-way D-type socket. This socket connects to the serial
port (RS232) of the host device.

* Power
The power connection is made through a 2.1mm connector to a mains adaptor.

* Audio Output
The audio output is made via a 3.5mm stereo socket. Both channels are
connected together. Stereo Walkman-style headphones or loudspeakers can be
used.

BEWARE:  Damage will be caused to the Juno if a mono plug is used. 


Appendix Three - Juno with Lithium Ion Batteries Physical Characteristics

Weight    420 grams
Size      15.0cm (l),  7.5cm (b),  5.0cm (h)

Power Source

*     Battery Type
The Juno contains two rechargeable Lithium-Ion Batteries with a maximum
voltage of 8.4volts and a capacity of 1Ahr. 

* Current Consumption
The current drawn by the Juno is dependent on volume and also whether it is
speaking. The circuit draws about 60mA when silent and about 110mA when
talking at maximum volume.

* Battery Life
A battery life of 10 hours, continuous speaking, is achievable. The batteries
can be recharged to 95% capacity in 2.5 hours and over 1000 charge/recharge
cycles are possible at 100% depth of discharge. 

* Mains Adaptor
The Juno can be used with a mains adaptor connected. There is circuitry to
protect the Juno from reverse mains adaptor connection and also to prevent
the batteries from being over-charged and over-discharged.

The mains adaptor requirements are as follows:

Voltage - 13V DC
Maximum current - 300mA
Connection - 2.1mm (Negative tip)

Supplying Power from your Own Equipment

To charge the batteries and drive the circuit properly, you need to supply a
voltage of between 13V. (There is an 8.4V regulator.)

If the batteries are not fitted then the 8.4V regulator can be removed and
the circuit can be supplied with a voltage of between 5.5V and 9V.

If the 5V regulator is removed then the circuit will just about run off 5V.
(The audio will clip at maximum volume.)

Connections

* Data
The data connection between the Juno and the PC is made with a flying 500mm
lead terminated in a 9-way D-type socket. This socket connects to the serial
port (RS232) of the host device.

* Power
The power connection is made through a 2.1mm connector to a mains adaptor.

* Audio Output
The audio output is made via a 3.5mm stereo socket. Both channels are
connected together. Stereo Walkman-style headphones or loudspeakers can be
used.

BEWARE: Damage will be caused to the Juno if a mono plug is used.


Appendix Four - PC2 Card Physical Characteristics

This section is for PC 2 card users who find that their card does not work at
the default address. The majority of users will probably never need to read
this section. 

The PC2 Card is an IBM PC/AT compatible card that will fit inside both desktop
PCs and portable PCs which have a standard card slot.

The card is capable of holding up to seven languages by way of the four
on-board ROM sockets. The first ROM socket is a 256Kb ROM and can hold four
languages. The other three ROM sockets are 64Kb and can hold one language.
The first socket can also hold a normal 64Kb ROM.

The physical size of the card is 20.3cm back to front by 9.9cm high, not
including the edge connector.

Address Selection 

The valid address of the PC card is selected by arranging links on seven of
the address lines, these lines are A1 to A6 inclusive and A8, each link can
be set to either 0 or 1. 

The default address of the card will still be decimal 776 (308 hex), this
will correspond to the links as follows. 

Addr line  A11  A10  A9   A8   A7   A6   A5   A4   A3   A2   A1   A0
Hex        3                   0                   8
Binary     0    0    1    1    0    0    0    0    1    0    0    0
Link no                   LK4       LK5  LK6  LK7  LK8  LK9
Link pos                  1         0    0    0    1    0

To change this from decimal 776 to decimal 792 (318 hex), LK7 would have to
be moved from 0 to 1. As with the old PC 2 card, the two default addresses
would work in 99% of applications so not many people will need to change more
than one link.

The method of connecting the PC beeps/speaker is different now, you can now
connect the 4 pin socket from the PC speaker directly to the 4 pin plug on
the card (J6), and then a single wire connects between J3 on the card and the
output on the PC motherboard.

Most functions of the PC 2 Card can be controlled by HAL5 but if you are
using your own software or wish to drive the card directly please see Appendix
6 for a description of communication to the card. 


Appendix Five - Gemini Physical Characteristics

Weight    68.25 grams
Size      13.0cm (l),  5.5cm (b),  1.8cm (h)

Power Source

The power to run the Gemini is derived via the PCMCIA card socket. The
quiescent current consumption is 200mA which drops to 180mA when silent and
rises to 220mA peak.

Connections 

Data communication and power connections are derived from the PC via its 68
way PCMCIA header. The only other user accessible connection is the 3.5mm
stereo headphone socket which must be used with a stereo plug to avoid damage
to the synthesiser. It is recommended that the headphone/speaker cable is
not longer than three metres.

Controls

All volume and language switching controls are made via an appropriate screen
reader, such as HAL5. 


Appendix Six - Description of UK English Phonemes

This section describes the Apollo 2's phonemes. Read this if you want to
change the way that words are pronounced.

Introduction

The following phonemes can be embedded in ASCII text to correct the
pronunciation of the Apollo 2. This can be done using your own software,
by sending phonemes only using the @X command or in the exceptions dictionary
in the Dolphin screen reader (currently HAL5) when misspelling proves
difficult. To tell the synthesiser that the letters are to be interpreted as 
a phoneme when mixing text and phonemes you must prefix them with an
underline (_).
 
Examples

cat   = _K_AE_T
again = _A_GP_E_N
zoo   = _Z_OO

Dolphin Representation

Example of Use

_AA    s<A>t
_AI    m<A>ke
_AR    f<A>ther
_AW    w<A>ter
_A     <A>bout
_B     <B>at
_CH    <CH>oose
_D     <D>og
_DH    <TH>is
_EE    h<EE>d
_EI    th<EI>r
_ER    b<IR>d
_E     b<E>d
_F     <F>ar
_G     <G>ap
_H     <H>ood
_IA    f<EA>r
_IE    t<IE>
_I     kn<I>t
_J     <J>ug
_KK    s<CH>ool
_K     <C>at
_L     <L>ong
_M     <M>ap
_NG    lo<NG>
_N     <N>ap
_OA    b<OA>t
_OO    g<OO>d
_OR    p<OR>e
_OW    p<OU>nd
_OY    j<OY>
_O     sh<O>t
_PP    s<P>eech
_P     <P>at
_QQ    <a slight pause>
_Q     <QU>ick
_R     <R>ip
_SH    <SH>ut
_S     <S>it
_TH    <TH>in
_TT    s<T>eel
_T     <T>ap
_UU    t<OO>
_U     b<U>t
_V     <V>an
_W     <W>et
_X     e<x>pel
_Y     <Y>oung
_ZH    plea<S>ure
_Z     <Z>ip  

You could experiment with the phoneme set for your own languages.


Appendix Seven - Communications  

This section contains information on how the Dolphin series 2 speech
synthesisers communicate with a PC or Toshiba computer. You should read this
only if you are going to write your own software to drive a Dolphin series 2
synthesisers.

Introduction

The new features for the Apollo 2 require two way (half duplex)
communications, in order for the speech and commands to be sent to the
Apollo/PC 2 card and for the indexing, language, settings data, and echo
back information to be returned. 

Serial Communications

The communication uses RS232 with RTS/CTS hardware handshaking in both
directions. The PC is 'master' over the link and initiates all transactions.
(Appendix 1 specifies the baud rate selection and cabling).

To talk to the Apollo 2, the PC raises its RTS line and waits for the Apollo
to respond with 'ready to receive data', which it does by raising the PC's
CTS line. A data byte is then transmitted to the Apollo 2's UART with framing:

1 start bit
8 data bits
no parity bit
1 stop bit

The Apollo 2 drops the PC's CTS for a short time while accepting each
character. Another data byte may be sent when CTS is raised again.

To read data from the Apollo 2 the PC drops its RTS line and waits or idles
(under higher level control) until the character(s) are received. The Apollo 2
raises the PC's CTS line in order to indicate that it is about to send data
to the PC. The Apollo 2 drops the PC's CTS line when the transmission has
finished. 

If the PC tries to read data when none is available, the Apollo 2 will return
with a NAK character (ASCII 21).

PC 2 card and Communications

The protocol is intended to make the operation of the PC to card
communications independent of the bus and processor speed. 

The Apollo/PC 2 card series synthesisers require robust 2-way communications
for use by functions such as continuous document read. This system relies on
a software handshaking method.

To send a character, c:

tries = 0
do
    1. Read until NULL returned
    2. Send char, c, to card
    3. Read until ACK(c) or NULL is returned
    4. increment tries 
until ACK(c) or too many tries

A NULL (0) read from the card indicates that it is in the quiescent state,
i.e. awaiting input  (it must have missed the char c being sent). An SOH (1)
means that the card has received a character at some point and is still
processing it. ACK(c) is a status byte; it is the character, c, with

bit 0 flipped if the character was received OK
bit 1 flipped if bit 0 flipped and the card has data to send

To read the data from the card:

tries = 0
do
    1. Read until NULL returned
    2. Send ENQ (5) to card
    3. Read until byte > 7, or a NULL is  returned
    4. increment tries 
until too many tries or a byte > 7 is returned

A request for data can be made at any time by sending ENQ to the card using
the above protocol. If no data is available, NAK (ASCII 21) is returned.

The maximum number of retries is typically a large number, say 1000. If you
get this many then the card is probably dead. The PC or Toshiba will be much
faster than the card processor, so each of the read and write operations
above must include a little delay, (say, executing a 100 iteration loop in
'C' code). 

A synthesiser driver library for DOS and Windows 3.1, including 'C' source
code, is available on request from Dolphin Systems for programmers who wish
to integrate Dolphin synthesiser access into their own programs.


Machine-readable manual

This print manual contains everything you should need to know about using
Dolphin synthesisers. For your convenience, the manual is also available in
an ASCII text file on your series 2 synthesiser disk.

We have supplied a program on your synthesiser disk called VIEW, which
enables you to read the ASCII text file version of this or any other manual
using HAL5 and your synthesiser. To read your manual:

1. Install HAL5 in the manner described on pages 8-11 of the HAL5 Screen
   Reader User Guide.

2. At the DOS prompt type:

VIEW APOLLO2.TXT <ENTER>

3. Finally, to start HAL5 reading your manual, press:

<ALT> and <P>, then <C>

If you have a Braille Embosser and a suitable Braille translation program,
such as Cipher from Dolphin, you could also produce your own Braille copy of
this manual using the APOLLO2.TXT file.

If you have read the manual and still have a problem using your 
speech synthesiser, or any other Dolphin product, then please call 
Dolphin during office hours, and ask for the HelpDesk.

END OF FILE.
